we don't know why he turned to atheism
these poems that he wrote that were pans
to to mephistophiles is that after he
becomes an atheist no he's writing so
the first one was
1837 wrote another in 1841 he wrote a
bunch of them and he did um he did a
just a chilling play called ULM yes um u
l a n m and people that are watching
this if they now type into their
computer em even in Google it'll pop up
play by Karl Marx it even has a
Wikipedia entry and uh let me warn
people you might not want to do this but
if you click the images button you will
see I mean you will I there's some
satanic stuff up there from like not
heavy metal but like black metal groups
so ULM is an anagram for Emanuel or
manuelo right so Marx takes Emanuel
which is the name given to Christ or
Manuel and he flips it into this anagram
called ulam and it's this chilling play
the main character is Lindo lucindo l u
c i n d o and uh you just can't believe
what what what you're reading with uh
with with with this play so that that
was written later in the 1840s so really
the prime of his writing including the
decade when he wrote The Communist
Manifesto is also the same decade uh
when he was writing these these these
these poems um and plays and plays and
plays and throughout his life his kids
and others would say uh yeah he had a
favorite line always from Mephisto
everything that exists deserves to
perish so that remains a part of him uh
through throughout his life um his son
Edgar has a letter where he addresses
his father as my dear devil which I
don't know maybe it's playful I don't
know although I would never you know
call my dad my dear devil his wife
called him
my Wicked Nave I I quote uh Henrik
hinen referring to him as a goblin try
to get take me under under under his
spell um other cases of of where of
where he's using that kind of
language um when Eng Les first met him
he describes him as this dark man from
Trier um who Hops and leaps and springs
on his heels the um the the monster of
10 th000 Devils he describes them and
the and the letter from his father is um
which was written in 1837 a year a year
before before his before his father
died so his father writes to him March
2nd
1837 Carl at times my heart Delights in
thinking of you and your fortune and yet
at times I cannot rid myself of ideas
which arouse in me sad for boings and
fear when I am struck struck as if by
lightning by the thought is your heart
in accord with your head your talents
has it room for the Earthly but gentler
sediments which in this veil of Sorrow
it's a beautiful letter in many ways are
essentially consoling for a man of
feeling and then this question from the
father of Carl Marx to his to his at
this point 18-year-old son and since
that heart Carl is obviously animated
and governed by a demon mhm not granted
to all men is that demon Heavenly or
fan will you ever and that is not the
least painful doubt of my heart will you
ever be capable of truly human domestic
happiness will and this doubt has no
less tortured me since I have come to
love a certain person like my own child
will you ever be capable of imparting
Happiness to those immediately around
you by the way the answer was no mhm mhm
right the father had intimations of that
yeah and since that heart is obviously
animated and governed by a demon not
granted to all men is that demon
Heavenly or fian that's his dad Y and
and there's always so many of those
things I think that a sympathetic uh
Marxist or Marxist biographer can shrug
off I mean there's just so many
statements like that from him and people
about him and people who knew him and
loved ones and a a wife a son a best
friend from Eng Les and then the
different writings okay so let's let's
let's attack this now was he a Satanist
right well that is a whole different
thing that I can't personally answer
well it seems not unreasonable to
presuppose that he was a devote of the
mephistophelian ethos yeah I think
that's right so the question is you know
what constitutes a Satanist well someone
who generates a murderous doctrine that
that raises questions I mean dead
serious about that like the most
murderous Doctrine ever promoted in the
in the roughly judeo-christian context
by by a large margin so I would say it's
incumbent on those who would defend him
to describe why we wouldn't just assume
that but the like the part of the reason
that I was so interested in talking to
you was because I felt that what you
documented in your book was
extraordinarily telling from the
psychological perspective because I know
how these things work
and it it is not something that can be
overlooked that that that that was his
favorite quote I mean not especially not
when you understand gira's centrality
yeah in the German intellectual
tradition that's like having a favorite
quote from Shakespeare right and it's
it's not any old quote it's the central
Credo of mephistophiles so that's
extraordinarily telling now okay now I
do have another can I give you a so
Robert Payne the very serious academic
no right winger British man of letters
the guy who really broke this first in
his 1968 biography of Marx all right his
chapter where he talks about this stuff
is called is called the demons in his
Mark's biography now he wrote this and
I'm not saying that I endorse this as an
academic I can't say if this is correct
there were times when Mark seemed to be
possessed by demons that's what pay
wrote and now this I would at least more
endorse mark had the devil's view of the
world and the devil's malignity mhm
sometimes he seemed to know that he was
accomplishing works of evil I think that
gets closer to it now uh Pastor Richard
worm brand who wrote the famous book
tortured for Christ and was tortured for
Christ in Romanian prisons by uh
communist captors who were shouting I am
the devil while they were torturing him
he did a book called Marx and Satan he's
convinced that Marx was a Satanist and
did some things ritualistically that it
might have even been satanic but I can't
I can't say that I can't Endor you see
evidence of that in never in terms of at
least his fantasies that's right that's
right yeah in fact pain even goes so far
as to say Vladimir Lenin right there's a
statement from lennin which said um when
I was a teen I broke from all religion I
took the cross from my neck and I threw
it in the rubbish bin and and pay has a
quote where not pay uh Richard worm
brand where I think um I think he
believes the lenon even stomped on it he
says that's a Satanic ritual I don't
know I don't know whether it is or not
but there's another case of Lenin who at
least did the work of the devil I mean
Lennon had according to Robert Conquest
wh Chamberlain the first historian of
the Russian Revolution 500,000 people
were killed from 1917 in 1923 under
Lenin not even including the Russian
Civil War if that's not the devil's work
I don't know what the hell is right but
but I think uh what pay and said in the
latter quote the devil's view of the
world the devil's malignity and at the
very least this identif ification with
kind of devilish like um destruction
right tearing everything down rebelling
against the world everything that exists
deserves to perish um that at least and
then the ideology that he created that
just happened to be responsible for the
deaths of over a 100 million people in
the 20th century you know more than
World War I and World War II combined so
that ideology was pretty hellacious M
yeah to yeah to say the least Okay so
and I think it's very naive not to
assume that the events that we described
in Marx's life are not connected right
yeah right corre and that that that his
economic polemics Were Somehow
independent of his poetic imagination
it's like obviously they weren't because
they wouldn't have had that motivational
Force so they they were calling on Dark
Forces obviously so because otherwise
they wouldn't have compelled people in
that manner especially not toward the
that sort of immense
sadistic murderousness and utter
destructiveness and of course get to the
hatred of God which all the Communists
did so all the Communists thereafter
seek to ban religion right right
atheists they're not exactly atheists
because they're trying to stomp
something out that's right it's not just
it's not just it's not a neutrality
that's right it's not a neutrality
toward religion it's not ear religion
it's not separation of church and state
it is militant aggressive atheism trosky
and lendon create the league of the
militant Godless right they ban religion
they have the out Church trials they
blow up churches they jail priests right
um You the the souls init and rights in
the gulag archipelago they put nuns in
special sections of the GG with
prostitutes right right deem them hor to
Christ absolutely Lennon said all
worship of a Divinity is a necrofilia
there is nothing more abominable than
religion so they they don't just try to
stop religion they they want um ppot the
Buddhist monks in Cambodia to renounce
their vows to
it's not enough for them to be quiet and
so after years I don't know how you can
separate a militantly anti-religious
atheism from from especially say within
a Christian context from something
approximating
satanic ideology because right I don't
see how I don't see how conceptually
that separation is possible it's one
thing to be atheist in the manner that
leaves people to go to hell in the hand
basket in their own way but to be
actually an enemy of the religious
Enterprise that's a whole different
thing it is so and and that obviously
Marx and the Communists were obviously
that clearly obviously and and and and
and Satan might say I don't care if you
believe in me or not you're doing my
work man I well shut down churches
blowing up churches it also that also
touches on the issue of what it means to
believe right and I mean you could
imagine some some one comparatively
harmless Who toys with ritualistic
satanic activities in a sort of dramatic
Manner and then you could imagine
someone who tortures nuns and Priests
and burns down churches but foro any
technical affiliation with Satan I would
say that the latter is the The Satanist
in a much deeper sense than the former
not that what the former is doing is
excusable or satanic yes right but but
to to to to do what the Communists did
to the religious Enterprise is evidence
of something far more militant than a
mere atheism
[Music]